# [Prototype] Business case to help join up government services

References in brackets are the [key decisions and evidence](https://github.com/alphagov/prototype-case-joined-up-services/blob/master/key-decisions-and-evidence.md) that supports this business case.

## Executive Summary

To support the 2030 Vision for the Digital, Data, and Technology (DDaT) function, Service Design and Technology Standards at the Government Digital Service (GDS) are seeking funding. We want to help solve the problem of users repeating steps along their journeys when interacting with government. This problem costs government F and the economy G in lost productivity. We will use the funding to:

- improve existing products and services
- resume paused experiments
- start new experiments

This is one part of a wider problem of disjointed services, which we also intend to seek further funding to solve. This business case will therefore expand in the coming months.

## Strategic Case

### Strategic Context

Service Design and Technology Standards at GDS sets the bar for what good services look like, and offers support to guide people using technology to improve services. We're making an initial case for investment to help  deliver on the 2030 Vision for the DDaT function.

The vision says, "in 2030, government will be joined up, trusted and responsive to user needs."

With other parts of GDS focusing on 'trusted' and 'responsive to user needs', we're focusing on helping government become more joined up. Currently, government services are not very joined up:

1. Users have to repeat steps
2. Users get stuck
3. Users can't easily switch channel

All three of these problems need addressing. To start, we're prototyping a business case to address "1. Users have to repeat steps", as users have less expectation to be able to seamlessly switch channel, and GDS is further away from solving the first problem than the second. After initial testing of this prototype, we will elaborate on the other problems (12b, 12c).

GDS should help solve this common problem, as other organisations struggle to make the case for change when the benefits are perceived to be realised by other government organisations or the end users of services (11b, 14a).

We're collaborating with GOV.UK to ensure we compliment their work. We will make incremental changes to this prototype business case, informed by user research and data analysis.

### Strategic Objectives

Users often repeat steps along their journeys when interacting with government. This wastes time for users and public servants. Time is money.

We've observed two main causes of repetition that aren't being addressed (12):

- organisations aren’t incentivised or funded to share privately-stored data about users. This leads to users repeatedly proving the same thing to government, across sequential transactions, related transactions and unrelated transactions (10, 11)
- policy teams design new and isolated schemes with limited time to understand existing services. This causes repetition for users across transactions (11)

Another key cause of repetition is users needing to identify themselves in different ways to different services. We're not looking at that, as [GOV.UK Verify](https://gds.blog.gov.uk/2019/07/19/moving-forward-our-work-on-identity-assurance/) are tackling that problem.

Users have to submit proof when using around 70% of government services (12c). Some of this proof was originally generated by another part of government, or foreign government. Proof often comes in the form of paper documents, such as licences, certificates, qualifications and deeds. Other times proof comes as digital text documents or spreadsheets. Proof can be a statement by government, such as planning permission or a judicial statement.

We think there are other causes of repetition, such as repetitive content being published without regard to other content. We aim to learn more about this later in our Discovery.

#### Cost of users repeating steps

We estimate that D% of questions government ask users are unnecessarily repeated, wasting on average E minutes per question. Users have to repeat themselves when switching from one channel to another, or interacting across organisational boundaries. This costs government F and the public G in lost productivity. Some parts of services could be entirely removed if we already had previous answers from users. Running these services costs H per year.

#### Key challenges for sharing privately-held data

Organisations struggle to do this because:

- different organisations have different definitions of common data attributes. This means they can't reuse another organisation's data (9a)
- there are few incentives to share data. Treasury don't allow you to claim benefits reaped by another part of government, so it is hard to make a business case for sharing your data if it doesn't benefit your organisation. The risk of data breaches still sits with your organisation, while the benefits are claimed by another (11b, 11c)
- different organisations have different availability and consistency requirements. When their requirements differ, it becomes harder to share data, and collecting the data from users again often becomes more preferable (11d)
- different organisations have different objectives, and it's hard to align them in order to collaborate (11e)

#### Key challenges for policy designing schemes

Policy teams often have to write options for Ministers over short periods of time (2d). They do their best to inform their evidence base with the latest views from experts. They have limited time to work with delivery teams to understand the effectiveness of existing services at delivering policy intent. As a result, they tend to design new schemes that repeat steps already present in existing services (13a).

Policy teams lay the foundations for services (2b). Once legislation is passed, repetition can get embedded into law. It is then much harder to remove repetition, as it becomes comparatively low priority for policy teams, but high priority for delivery teams (2c). It's therefore much more cost effective to influence policy early on.

### Critical Success Factors

Success factors might include:

- Users aren't repeating themselves
- Users have a smoother, more joined up experience when using government services
- Civil servants take action to address our strategic objectives (above)
- Civil servants can work across organisational boundaries towards outcomes for users

### Benefits

To be written.

## Economic Case

### Options

To be written, with the support of an options framework table.

#### How might we

Before we develop options, we've written some how might we questions to return to later.

How might we incentivise government organisations to share privately-held data to reduce repetition for users, and remove the need for some services?

How might we help policy teams understand the effectiveness of current services at delivering on policy intent?
